1. scheduler is a component of the kernel - may be treated 
   as a set of routines and a set of data-structures - managed
   using well defined rules and policies 

2. scheduler() routine/method may be invoked by the system 
   , when appropriate - one such is what we saw in the case
   of preemption point - another is what we saw in the case
   of blocking a process inside a system call  - one more 
   such is when a process is terminated 

3. scheduler may be divided into 2 components - one is the 
   policy / algorithm component - the other is the context 
   switching component - typically, study of scheduler 
   revolves around policy part, mostly - this in addition
   to other aspects that we discussed during preemption 
   complete the entire picture of scheduling in a system 

4. there are several policies proposed theoritically - 
   not all are used in practice - even if used, there are
   modifications to theoretical policies, when they are 
   implemented - these changes are for convenience !!!

5. in addition, several scheduling policies may be implemented
   in a given system - meaning, they may co-exist at the 
   same time - depending upon applications' requirements,
   one or more policies may be used in a given system 

6. scheduling policies can be broadly divided into 2 categories :
   non realtime scheduling policies and real time scheduling 
   policies 

7. in short, real time scheduling policies provide strict 
   scheduling priorities - non real time policies do not 
   implement strict scheduling priorities - their use
   is highly dependent on the applications and system's
   requirements !!!

8. typically non real time scheduling policies are more
   commonly used - 2 such policies are commonly used
   are time-slicing and time-sharing policies - a less
   common policy is first come first serve (FCFS) 

   Note: whenever we study about a scheduler, the following
         are the key points :

               - when the scheduler is invoked - this is
                 where the control of the scheduler is
                 managed !!! one is the interrupt handling 
                 and the other is system call API - there are
                 more subtle cases !!!!
               - what happens when a scheduler is invoked ???
                    this is where, policy of the scheduler 
                    comes into play 
               - what happens to the current process when the 
                 scheduler decides preemption ??
                   - this is in addition to adding the current 
                     process to ready queue - there may be other
                     house keeping !!
               - which process is scheduled /selected for dispatching 
                 ,when the scheduler is invoked ??
                    - this is where the policy comes into play !!!
               - in all the above cases, ready queue/lists are 
                 manipulated to manage pds or other descriptors !!!



9. let us start with FCFS - it is not a bad policy as 
   it appears - if a process is scheduled by the scheduler,
   process will be executed on the processor till one of 
   the following occur - process terminates(normally/abnormally), 
   process blocks or process yields !!! in most modern operating
   systems, there is a special system call which enables a 
   process to voluntarily yield the cpu - this is known as
   yielding - this yielding is the basis for co-operative 
   scheduling - meaning, FCFS may be used more effectively 
   with co-operative scheduling with the help of yielding 
   system call !!! without yielding system call, FCFS may 
   appear an useless scheduling policy !!! this scheduling 
   policy may not be suitable for interactive/time sensitive
   applications/tasks, if responsiveness is unacceptable !!!

10. which type of scheduling policy may be better suited for 
    such interactive applications/tasks ???

    - as per computing science, there is something called 
     as ideal processor - an ideal processor uses ideal 
     multitasking to share its cpu cycles/computing power among 
     existing processes/tasks !!! let us assume there are
     10 processes/tasks running on the processor for 
     10seconds - each of them would be given 1/10th of 
     the 10seconds of computing cycles using fine grained
     multitasking !!! 

    - what is meant by fine grained multitasking of processor
      cycles ??
        - typical example may be that the processor 
          automatically/implicitly switches from on e
          process/task to another process/task every 
          100 cycles or 100 instructions or some fine grained
          unit !!!
        - what is the fundamental requirement for such a 
          processor, which is different from a normal 
          processor ??? processor must be able to 
          maintain h/w contexts of several processes 
          using several sets of registers !!
        - to manage serveral processes without OS support,
          processor must support several registers set !!!
        - processor must implement process switching 
          in h.w. without os support !!! 
        - if there is a such processor, what are the advantages ??
           - processes will be responsive !!
           - overhead due to OS is minimized !!!
           - processor will be more efficiently used !!!
           - processor time is fairly allocated among processes ???
                 - multiuser environment !!!
                 - multithreading environment !!!! 
 

    - what is meant by coarse grained multitasking of processor
      cycles ??

        - in this, 1ms or 4ms or 10ms or 20ms - basically, 
          in the order of milliseconds !!!

        - time-slice based RR scheduling policy and time-sharing
          based fair-shared scheduling policy uses coarse
          grained multitasking of cpu cycles 

11. let us make a few conclusions on a typical RR scheduling 
    policy :
      - typically, time-slice allocated to a process
        is fixed - say 10ms !!
      - all processes are said to be of equal priority
      - a process scheduled by the scheduler is said to 
        execute on the processor until one of the following 
        occurs:
            - process terminates
            - process blocks
            - process's time-slice expires 
      - RR scheduling policy requires the operating system 
        support and smaller the time-slice better the 
        concurrency and responsiveness, but higher switching 
        over heads !!

12. let us make a few conclusions on a typical time-sharing 
    scheduling policy :(done by the scheduler of os, not by processor) 
       - time-sharing is a better approximation of fine-grained
         multitasking 

       - in time-sharing policy, cpu time is divided into 
         smaller time-slots - known as epochs !!!
       - each epoch may be of 20ms/40ms or some no. which 
         is reasonable and acceptable
       - for a given epoch time, n processes which are ready
         are allocated epoch time/n , in each epoch !!!
       - time-share allocated to a process in given epoch
         is dependent on the no. of processes in the ready
         queue during the epoch !!!
       - multitasking is based on the load in the system and 
         in the case of time-slicing, it is not sensitive 
         to the load conditions - in this sense, time-sharing 
         is more closer to fine grained multitasking !!!
         

13. let us make a few conclusions on real time scheduling policies :

    - the best example for a real-time scheduling policy 
      is priority based scheduling policy 
    - in this policy, there is no time-slice / no time-share, 
      just a strict priority 
    - whenever scheduler is invoked, it selects the highest 
      priority based process and schedules it on the processor
    - a process with the highest priority is allowed to 
      execute on the processor until one of the following 
      occurs:
        - process terminates
        - process blocks
        - process is preempted by another higher priority process
          that has entered the ready queue      
             - if a current process is executing on the 
               processor, how come a new, higher priority 
               process enters ready queue ??
                     - assumption is that we are in a 
                       uniprocessor system !!!
                     - current has woken up another 
                       process via a system call API !!!
                       - scheduler gets invoked after the 
                       system call API !!
                     - I/O interrupts/interrupt handlers may 
                       wake up higher priority processes and
                       end up calling the scheduler !!!  

        - in a system that supports full preemption(meaning, 
          user-space and system space), priorities are 
          honoured immediately and this is also one of 
          the advantages of fully preemptive system 
        - in a partially preemptive system , priorities
          may not be immediately honoured, if a system call
          is being executed by a lower priority process !!! 
        - scheduling policy is a factor that influences
          whether a system must be fully preemptive or 
          partially preemptive !!! it is highly configurable
          in modern day systems !!!

        - in a system that supports non real time scheduling
          policies and real time scheduling policies, 
          processes with real time scheduling policies are
          given higher importance over processes with 
          non real time scheduling policies !!! 

        - in terms of implementation, do you find any specific
          run-time problem in the case of priority based 
          scheduling policy !!!
            - starvation of low priority processes - this 
              is not the responsibility of the scheduler,
              it is upto the developer/admins. to 
              tune the processes/tasks !!!      

            - unlike time-slicing/time-sharing policies,
              here processes are expected to be scheduled
              as per their priorities - meaning, if there
              are n processes, one with the highest priority 
              must be selected for scheduling - if the
              n is large, the overhead increases !! this 
              is a practical problem in implementing 
              priority based scheduling !!!
               - a typical solution used is multi-level 
                 ready queues - meaning, an array of 
                 ready queues - one ready queue per priority 
                 level !!!
               - whenever a process is added to the array 
                 of ready queues, pd of the process is added
                 to the tail of the appropriate ready queue corresponding
                 to the process's real time priority !!!
               - whenever a process is selected by the scheduler,
                 it scans the head of the queues -  from highest 
                 priority queueu to the lowest priority queue - 
                 this minimizes the overhead in scanning all 
                 pds !!!
               

14. the above policies are implemented in a system like Linux 
    with suitable changes and following are the main features:

    - each process/task has its own scheduling parameters - 
      due to this, it is possible to assign a different set 
      of parameters to different tasks - this implies that 
      each process may be assigned its own scheduling policy 
      and appropriate parameters 
 
    - policies and parameters may be assigned/modified using 
      utilities or system call APIs, as appropriate !!!

    - in the case time - sharing, non realtime policy, 
      Linux provides the following features:
        - typical epoch used is 20ms, but can be modified
          if needed 
        - still, fair-share scheduler used in linux will 
          not scale for higher loads - at some point, 
          it will break and multiprocessing(multiple processors are 
          available in the computing system) is the 
          next natural extension - still, the policies
          discussed here are used along with multiprocessing 
          related scheduling, as applicable !!
        - in a typical fair-share scheduling, each process
          is allocated the equal, fair time - share and 
          all processes are of equal priority 
        - in Linux, fair-share scheduler uses equal priority
          and equal time-share, by default - the priority used
          in this scheduler is known as nice priority and 
          such a priority is a non real time priority !!! 
        - however, if needed a non realtime priority 
          known as nice priority can be modified such 
          that time-share of a process may be increased or
          decreased !!!
Note : why is this nice priority known as non real time priority ???
       what is the significance of the priority here ??
              - we can adjust the time share of a non real time
                process !!! 

       whether this priority is a strict priority or 
       not a strict priority ???

             - not a strict priority !!!
                - if a higher non real time priority is assigned
                  to a process, it will be allocated a higher 
                  time share - however, if its time share expires, 
                  system will prempt and schedule a lower non real 
                  time priority process - this is the reason, it is
                  non real time and this is the reason it is 
                  not strict !!!

        - nice priority is in the range of -20 to +19 - 
          -20 is the highest and +19 is the lowest - 
          -20 assigns highest time-share for a process
          and +19 assigns lowest time share for process-
          -20 is said to have a large weightage - W
          and +19 is said to have a very small weightage - w
       -  other nice priorities are also assigned appropriate
           weightage 
       - let us assume there are 4 processes with default nice
         priority - default weightage is wd - their time-shares 
         are equal to 
         20 ms * wd / 4*wd 
         
       - let us assume that 4 processes are assigned different 
         nice priorities - their weightages will be w1,w2,w3 and
         w4 - their time shares are as below:
          -   20ms * w1/ w1+w2+w3+w4
          -   20ms * w2/ w1+w2+w3+w4
          -   so on 

       - depending upon applications and the requirements 
         of the system , we may fine tune the nice priority 
         as needed !!! 
   
       - nice priority decides time-share, but does not ensure
         that a process with higher nice priority will not 
         be preempted by another process with lower nice
         priority !!! this is the meaning of less strict 
         priorities and non real time scheduling !!!
 


    - a Linux system implements FF real-time scheduling 
      policy, which has the following characteristics :
      - each process may be assigned an unique real - time
        priority in the range of 1 - 99 - 1 is the lowest 
        and 99 is the highest !!
      - for each priority, there is a level of ready queue
         maintained in the array of ready queues !!
      - in this case, if a process has highest priorit y
        and ready to execute, it will be immediately 
        given the processor and no other process with 
        lower prioritycan preempt this process !!!
      - if there are several processes ina particular
        level of ready queue, they are honoured using 
        FCFS policy at that level - still, priority based
        scheduling is effective across the levels !! 
      - is it possible to implement FCFS scheduling policy
        using FF scheduling policy of Linux !!!         
      - assign all processes in this policy to be equal - 
        this can be achieved using "chrt" utility or 
        sched_setscheduler() system call API - do look
        into the manual pages of the utility and the 
        system call !!  
    - Linux also supports another policy known as 
      RR policy - this is not the typical RR policy - 
      its features are as below :
        - it supports real time priorities in the range
          1 - 99 (same as FF)
        - most decisions are made based on priorities
        - in addition, processes using RR policy also 
          share the same set of ready queues as that 
          of FF
        - in addition, if there are processes of RR
          policy at a given level, system applies 
          time slicing among the set of equal priority 
          processes - once again, by default RR is
          a priority based scheduling , but can be 
          used to implement typical RR, if priorities
         of processes are set to be equal !!! 
     - what happens if we assign a higher priority and 
       FF policy to a process in the system and it 
       may be a CPU bound process, occassionally !!! 

15. for processes, following are useful:
   
      - sched_setscheduler()
      - setpriority()
      - sched_yield()
      - nice , renice and chrt utilities !!!

      Note: read the man pages of the above for details and 
            usage - in most cases, read the footnotes of the 
            manual pages - they are both useful and provide
            pointers to other related /relevany system call APIs !!







 








 
